# bip39_words

Dart implementation of [Bitcoin BIP39](https://github.com/softwareboy92/bitcion_bip39.git): Mnemonic code for generating deterministic keys

Convert from [bitcoinjs/bip39](https://github.com/softwareboy92/bitcion_bip39.git)

## Reminder for developers

***Please remember to allow recovery from mnemonic phrases that have invalid checksums (or that you don't have the wordlist)***

When a checksum is invalid, warn the user that the phrase is not something generated by your app, and ask if they would like to use it anyway. This way, your app only needs to hold the wordlists for your supported languages, but you can recover phrases made by other apps in other languages.

However, there should be other checks in place, such as checking to make sure the user is inputting 12 words or more separated by a space.


## Examples
``` dart
// Generate a random mnemonic (uses crypto.randomBytes under the hood), defaults to 128-bits of entropy
var mnemonic = bip39.generateMnemonic(CHINESE_SIMOLIFIED_LIST)
// => 'seed sock milk update focus rotate barely fade car face mechanic mercy'

bip39.mnemonicToSeedHex('党 加 针 建 腐 灯 仇 宜 卫 壳 卖 彻',CHINESE_SIMOLIFIED_LIST)
// => String '5cf2d4a8b0355e90295bdfc565a022a409af063d5365bb57bf74d9528f494bfa4400f53d8349b80fdae44082d7f9541e1dba2b003bcfec9d0d53781ca676651f'

bip39.mnemonicToSeed('basket actual',CHINESE_SIMOLIFIED_LIST)
// => Uint8List [92, 242, 212, 168, 176, 53, 94, 144, 41, 91, 223, 197, 101, 160, 34, 164, 9, 175, 6, 61, 83, 101, 187, 87, 191, 116, 217, 82, 143, 73, 75, 250, 68, 0, 245, 61, 131, 73, 184, 15, 218, 228, 64, 130, 215, 249, 84, 30, 29, 186, 43, 0, 59, 207, 236, 157, 13, 83, 120, 28, 166, 118, 101, 31]

bip39.validateMnemonic(mnemonic,CHINESE_SIMOLIFIED_LIST)
// => true

bip39.validateMnemonic('basket actual',CHINESE_SIMOLIFIED_LIST)
// => false
```


``` dart
import 'package:bip39_words/bip39.dart' as bip39;
import 'package:bip39_words/src/wordlists/chinese_simplified.dart';

main() async {
  String randomMnemonic = bip39.generateMnemonic(CHINESE_SIMOLIFIED_LIST);
  print(randomMnemonic);
  String seed = bip39.mnemonicToSeedHex("党 加 针 建 腐 灯 仇 宜 卫 壳 卖 彻");
  print(seed);
  String mnemonic = bip39.entropyToMnemonic('00000000000000000000000000000000',CHINESE_SIMOLIFIED_LIST);
  print(mnemonic);
  bool isValid = bip39.validateMnemonic(mnemonic,CHINESE_SIMOLIFIED_LIST);
  print(isValid);
  isValid = bip39.validateMnemonic('basket actual',CHINESE_SIMOLIFIED_LIST);
  print(isValid);
  String entropy = bip39.mnemonicToEntropy(mnemonic,CHINESE_SIMOLIFIED_LIST);
  print(entropy);
}
```

# Wordlists

* [English](https://github.com/softwareboy92/bitcion_bip39/blob/master/lib/src/wordlists/english.dart)
* [Japanese](https://github.com/softwareboy92/bitcion_bip39/blob/master/lib/src/wordlists/japanese.dart)
* [Korean](https://github.com/softwareboy92/bitcion_bip39/blob/master/lib/src/wordlists/korean.dart)
* [Spanish](https://github.com/softwareboy92/bitcion_bip39/blob/master/lib/src/wordlists/spanish.dart)
* [Chinese (Simplified)](https://github.com/softwareboy92/bitcion_bip39/blob/master/lib/src/wordlists/chinese_simplified.dart)
* [Chinese (Traditional)](https://github.com/softwareboy92/bitcion_bip39/blob/master/lib/src/wordlists/chinese_traditional.dart)
* [French](https://github.com/softwareboy92/bitcion_bip39/blob/master/lib/src/wordlists/french.dart)
* [Italian](https://github.com/softwareboy92/bitcion_bip39/blob/master/lib/src/wordlists/italian.dart)
* [Czech](https://github.com/softwareboy92/bitcion_bip39/blob/master/lib/src/wordlists/czech.dart)
* [Portuguese](https://github.com/softwareboy92/bitcion_bip39/blob/master/lib/src/wordlists/portuguese.dart)

## Wordlists (Special Considerations)

### Japanese

1. **Developers implementing phrase generation or checksum verification must separate words using ideographic spaces / accommodate users inputting ideographic spaces.**
(UTF-8 bytes: **0xE38080**; C/C+/Java: **"\u3000"**; Python: **u"\u3000"**)
However, code that only accepts Japanese phrases but does not generate or verify them should be fine as is.
This is because when generating the seed, normalization as per the spec will
automatically change the ideographic spaces into normal ASCII spaces, so as long as your code never shows the user an ASCII space
separated phrase or tries to split the phrase input by the user, dealing with ASCII or Ideographic space is the same.

2. Word-wrapping doesn't work well, so making sure that words only word-wrap at one of the
ideographic spaces may be a necessary step. As a long word split in two could be mistaken easily
for two smaller words (This would be a problem with any of the 3 character sets in Japanese)

### Spanish

1. Words can be uniquely determined typing the first 4 characters (sometimes less).

2. Special Spanish characters like 'ñ', 'ü', 'á', etc... are considered equal to 'n', 'u', 'a', etc... in terms of identifying a word. Therefore, there is no need to use a Spanish keyboard to introduce the passphrase, an application with the Spanish wordlist will be able to identify the words after the first 4 chars have been typed even if the chars with accents have been replaced with the equivalent without accents.

3. There are no words in common between the Spanish wordlist and any other language wordlist, therefore it is possible to detect the language with just one word.

### Chinese

1. Chinese text typically does not use any spaces as word separators. For the sake of
uniformity, we propose to use normal ASCII spaces (0x20) to separate words as per standard.

### French

Credits: @Kirvx @NicolasDorier @ecdsa @EricLarch
([The pull request](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/issues/152))

1.  High priority on simple and common French words.
2.  Only words with 5-8 letters.
3.  A word is fully recognizable by typing the first 4 letters (special French characters "é-è" are considered equal to "e", for example "museau" and "musée" can not be together).
4.  Only infinitive verbs, adjectives and nouns.
5.  No pronouns, no adverbs, no prepositions, no conjunctions, no interjections (unless a noun/adjective is also popular than its interjection like "mince;chouette").
6.  No numeral adjectives.
7.  No words in the plural (except invariable words like "univers", or same spelling than singular like "heureux").
8.  No female adjectives (except words with same spelling for male and female adjectives like "magique").
9.  No words with several senses AND different spelling in speaking like "verre-vert", unless a word has a meaning much more popular than another like "perle" and "pairle".
10. No very similar words with 1 letter of difference.
11. No essentially reflexive verbs (unless a verb is also a noun like "souvenir").
12. No words with "ô;â;ç;ê;œ;æ;î;ï;û;ù;à;ë;ÿ".
13. No words ending by "é;ée;è;et;ai;ait".
14. No demonyms.
15. No words in conflict with the spelling corrections of 1990 (http://goo.gl/Y8DU4z).
16. No embarrassing words (in a very, very large scope) or belonging to a particular religion.
17. No identical words with the Spanish wordlist (as Y75QMO wants).

### Italian

Credits: @paoloaga @Polve

Words chosen using the following rules:

1. Simple and common Italian words.
2. Length between 4 and 8 characters.
3. First 4 letters must be unique between all words.
4. No accents or special characters.
5. No complex verb forms.
6. No plural words.
7. No words that remind negative/sad/bad things.
8. If both female/male words are available, choose male version.
9. No words with double vocals (like: lineetta).
10. No words already used in other language mnemonic sets.
11. If 3 of the first 4 letters are already used in the same sequence in another mnemonic word, there must be at least other 3 different letters.
12. If 3 of the first 4 letters are already used in the same sequence in another mnemonic word, there must not be the same sequence of 3 or more letters.

Rules 11 and 12 prevent the selection words that are not different enough. This makes each word more recognizable among others and less error prone. For example: the wordlist contains "atono", then "atomo" is rejected, but "atomico" is good.

All the words have been manually selected and automatically checked against the rules.

### Czech

Credits: @zizelevak (Jan Lansky zizelevak@gmail.com)

Words chosen using the following rules:

1.  Words are 4-8 letters long.
2.  Words can be uniquely determined typing the first 4 letters.
3.  Only words containing all letters without diacritical marks. (It was the hardest task, because in one third of all Czech letters has diacritical marks.)
4.  Only nouns, verbs and adverbs, no other word types. All words are in basic form.
5.  No personal names or geographical names.
6.  No very similar words with 1 letter of difference.
7. Words are sorting according English alphabet (Czech sorting has difference in "ch").
8.  No words already used in other language mnemonic sets (english, italian, french, spanish). Letters with diacritical marks from these sets are counted as analogous  letters without diacritical marks.

### Portuguese

Credits: @alegotardo @bitmover-studio @brenorb @kuthullu @ninjastic @sabotag3x @Trimegistus

1. Words can be uniquely determined typing the first 4 characters.
2. No accents or special characters.
3. No complex verb forms.
4. No plural words, unless there's no singular form.
5. No words with double spelling.
6. No words with the exact sound of another word with different spelling.
7. No offensive words.
8. No words already used in other language mnemonic sets.
9. The words which have not the same spelling in Brazil and in Portugal are excluded.
10. No words that remind negative/sad/bad things.
11. No very similar words with 1 letter of difference.
